Review Post PR [Test] (#13)
itstorque/itstorque.github.io: _blog_posts/2025_01_05_pin_analysis/index.md

variable-length passwords with special characters and capitalization. For one, the 
constant-sized constraint of this significantly reduces the ability to tune the speed of
inputing (this is ignoring the fact that you really shouldn't be trying to optimize how fast
it is to input a 4 digit password). The other end of this is 4-digit pins are much less secure
than typical alphanumeric passwords where most sites require more than 8 digits. An optimistic
calculation of an alphanumeric password with 8-12 digits requires a malicious entity to try 
$72^{8}-72^{12}$ possible combinations. When compared to a 4-digit pin with $10^4$, this is a 
puny amount.

Disclaimer: Unlike passwords we use everywhere, 4 digit pins aren't meant to have high entropy
and instead operate by having a very low number of allowed trials ($\approx 3$) before the card
is locked. This is to strike a balance between easy to remember when purchasing at the kiosk
but just enough to add a layer of security. This will have implications to the strategy one
should use for a code: see [What does this mean for my pincode?](#what-does-this-mean-for-my-pincode).

My hope is that this:

> 1. will be a fun excersize on the axis of the human psychology on password choosing - maybe with some transferable knowledge to more complicated passwords. 

Author: ```suggestion
1. Will be a fun excersize on the axis of the human psychology on password choosing - maybe with some transferable knowledge to more complicated passwords. 
```

> 2. serve as a reminder of why pin-codes aren't that great of a baseline for generic authentication and that using good (high-entropy) password generation techniques are important. (See [Apple Automatic Strong Passwords](https://support.apple.com/guide/security/automatic-strong-passwords-secc84c811c4/web) or [1Password's blog post on generating strong passwords](https://blog.1password.com/how-to-generate-random-password/)).

Author: ```suggestion
2. Serve as a reminder of why pin-codes aren't that great of a baseline for generic authentication and why using good (high-entropy) password generation techniques is a good idea. (See [Apple Automatic Strong Passwords](https://support.apple.com/guide/security/automatic-strong-passwords-secc84c811c4/web) or [1Password's blog post on generating strong passwords](https://blog.1password.com/how-to-generate-random-password/)).
```

> 
> - TODO: FIDO U2F?

Author: ```suggestion
```

# Data retrival

I will be using the [haveibeenpwned.com](https://haveibeenpwned.com/) API to retrieve information about leaked passwords. 
This is a great website that allows you to check if a password you use has been leaked using a smart mechanism to keep your

> password secure. It relies on the basis of hash functions that takes an input string to a long hexadecimal string 

Author: ```suggestion
password secure. It relies on hash functions that take in an input string and output a hexadecimal string
```

> $h(p) \xrightarrow{} s$ where $p$ is our password and $s$ is a hash of that password. These hash functions are typically hard

Author: ```suggestion
$h(p) \xrightarrow{} s$ where $p$ is our password and $s$ is a hash of that password (generated by the function $h$). These hash functions are typically hard
```

4. You can compare the ending of your hash and the returned hashes to figure out which entry (if any!) corresponds to your password.
   - If you see an entry, the counts correspond to the number of times its been leaked from the vast amount of leak data [haveibeenpwned.com](https://haveibeenpwned.com/) has been collecting.
   - Not all of those instances will always correspond to your accounts if someone else happened to use the same password. But you can make sure this doesn't happen by choosing a more secure password.

I do the above procedure for all 4-digit pins spanning `0000-9999`.

# Data Time!

Now that we have this data, let's analyze it. One visualization I particularly enjoyed and decided to reproduce using up-to-date data 
is from [the late Nick Berry's blog Data Genetics](http://www.datagenetics.com/blog/september32012/index.html). 

## Interactive Plot

Before getting into the analysis, here is an interactive plot you can play around with. The x-axis is the first two numbers of a pin
and the y-axis is the last two. The colormap is the log counts of uses, the brighter/yellower it is, the more common of a passcode

> it is (that's worse). Hover on different pins to see what their counts are and feel free to make some hypotheses before we dive deeper!

Author: ```suggestion
it is (that's worse). Hover on different pins to see what their counts are and feel free to make some hypotheses on patterns you identify before we dive deeper!
```

<script src="four_pin_code_interactive_plot.js"></script>

## The O.G. Figure

This figure is replicating the 2012 igure from [Nick Berry's blog](http://www.datagenetics.com/blog/september32012/index.html) with updated information.
Below is a static version of the image for no-js browsers.

<center>
<figure>
   <img src="four_pin_code_analysis_heatmap.png"/>
  <figcaption>Figure plotting the log-counts of various 4-digit pins where the x-axis and y-axis are the first and last two digits of the pincode respectively. It's easy to see correlations in the data,
  such as the diagonal representing repated doublets (code of the form $c_1c_2c_1c_2$) or the vertical feature at 19/20 corresponding to passwords with the basis of years under them (for example, codes based on birthdays).
  </figcaption>
</figure>
</center>

We can see several notable features such as a strong vertical features, a strong diagonal, random-seeming spikes of color with some 
diagonal structures, a large dark band on the left and finally a weird `y=x` symmetric bright region in the bottom left corner. We'll
analyze all of these (and more!) in the next sections.

# In Depth-Analysis

## What years are code-years

> Let's zoom in on the vertical feature from the above plot

Author: ```suggestion
Let's zoom in on the vertical feature centered on the first two digits 19 and 20 from the above plot
```

distribution and the makeup of the population.

## Date Codes

<center>
<figure>
   <img src="four_pin_code_analysis_date_grid.png" class="large"/>
  <figcaption>
<div markdown="1" style="text-align: left">

- (a) i. zoom into the lower-left corner of the figure in [The O.G. Figure](#the-og-figure), highlighting two regions that correspond to dates.
- (a) ii. the green vertical segment pre-rotation
- (b) Number of days per month for a calendar year (including leap years)
- (c) i. the red region from (a) i. corresponding to codes that resemble a date of the format DD/MM.
- (c) ii. the green region from (a) ii. rotated to resemble (c) i. for dates of the format MM/DD.
</div>

  </figcaption>
</figure>
</center>

There is a $y=x$ symmetric structure in the bottom left of the main figure that resembles codes built from joining months and days together.
We can verify this by seeing how the structure in (c) i and ii matches that of (b), where the months that have less than 31 days have a divot in them.
The median of the `DD/MM` code panel (red dashed pane) is greater than that of the `MM/DD` panel (green solid), suggesting it is more common
as a pin code.

> For the curious, here is a heatmap of aggregated birthdays from the social security administration:

Author: ```suggestion
For the sake of completeness, here is a heatmap of aggregated birthdays from the social security administration:
```
